We're in the beautiful home this afternoon of Dr.
Dan Anderson of Fulton City, that's Fort Worth,
Texas, an illustrious veterinarian who can look
back on a very long and productive career. I think
we ought to start with his background, tell where
he was born and brought up, and I think we ought to
start a little bit with his parents. Dan, tell us
about your mother and father, when they were born
and what their names were. Well, my mother's name
was McCoskey, Lucille McCoskey, and that
couldn't be anything but Irish, you know. My
father was William L. Anderson,
and his
parents
were natives of Rockwell. My great-grandfather
father on that side. You say your daddy's parents
were natives of Rockwell, Texas? Yes. Boy, that
goes back a long ways. Over 100 years. And my
great-grandfather migrated to this country. We
have those old letters to show. But before the
Civil War, of course. And
came out of southern Indiana. Uniontown,
Indiana, and I thought I'd go back up there and look
around. Just one of those things I haven't done.
That's close to Lincoln country. Yes, yes. Sure
is. Yeah. Not too far. But anyway, my
background is from a stock farm. My mother and
father...
reared four children,
two girls and two boys. And you were brought up in
Rockwall? East of Rockwall, on the stock farm. And
my parents weren't,
they always had to work to educate the kids, but I
think they did a tremendous job because all four of
us got an education.
What type of schoolhouse did you go to? You started
out in first grade? Rockwell? I lived so far out in
the country that we couldn't commute in that black
land over there. The first two years I was in
school, I stayed with my grandparents, my
Anderson grandparents in Rockwall, and went to
school. And then in the third grade, I went to Royce
City, which was five miles from my home. By that
time, old Paul Ferguson had built some little
concrete highways that we could get to town on out
of that black land, so the kids the three of us the
older ones started to royce city you were a
ferguson fan were you oh uh everybody voted for jim
ferguson out there in that agricultural country
and anybody that didn't vote for him well they ran
them off they wouldn't they wouldn't lease land to
them the next year but anyway uh uh
we spent uh two years we went to Royce City then we
transferred back to Rockwell which was kind of
home base for us always and most of the family both
sides of the family lived there and I graduated
from from Rockwell High School in 1934. You didn't
have the honor of going to a one-room grade school
did you? No. That was too bad. I was I was fortunate
or unfortunate enough to have to go to a larger
school.
Then I
had dreams of athletics and had an opportunity to
go to Texas Tech
when the old coach that was out there came by and
talked to Charles Atkins and I. And I went out and
looked around. And then between the time I talked
with him and
September, it was back during the Depression
there. And we had an assistant county agent come
into Rockwell County
that somehow convinced me that I ought to go to A&M.
You're talking about 1933? No, about 1934, the
summer of 34. And
I went to A&M and the first year I studied animal
science or animal husbandry back there then and
minored in business. And at the end of my freshman
year, I decided that veterinary medicine was the
best animal husbandry course I could take. So I
transferred over to the School of Veterinary
Medicine and went to summer school after my
freshman year and got government, freshman
physiology, and organic chemistry behind me.
I gathered up
the courses as best I could and graduated with my
class. I guess you'd say I'm just a three-year
student, because I went to that summer school. But
then I didn't know until the last term of my senior
year whether I was going to graduate. I didn't know
whether I'd get my courses in or not. But back there
then, I took freshman anatomy and sophomore
anatomy together. Of course, I went to school day
and night, you know, around the clock. That was
1936, your freshman anatomy. Mark Francis was
still around then, wasn't he? Oh, yes. Let me see.
In 1935 and 1936, I
studied anatomy under Dr. Francis.
He had an assistant that taught us that taught
also, but Dr. Francis was head of the department,
of course. And then there was Marsteller, Dr.
Marsteller. These two gentlemen had rather
different personalities, didn't they? What was
Dr. Francis like? Oh, Dr. Francis was just a staid
gentleman.
as far as the students were concerned.
He couldn't hear. If you wanted to talk to him, you
had to write something down. He said, that didn't
make any difference. Most of what you hear is not
worth a darn anyway. He didn't let that deter him
because he had no hearing. But he
was very capable and And he always had some little
way of tying that anatomical structure or that
artery and nerve or that bone. He'd tie it to
something that you'd see in the clinic some of
these days. I remember he was
no doubt talking about the stifle. And he showed us
how a string-halted horse would walk, see? And he
says, you'll find it right there. You'll know all
about that, though, when you get to talking to
Marsteller down there in the clinic. And he just
had a way of impressing you with those important
structures, that part of the anatomy which he felt
that you'd be using the most. or it'd kind of be
everyday use for you when you got out and got into
practice. Mark Steller was a
very peculiar individual.
I always got along well with him. But some of the
students, if they If they did something that Mark
Stoller didn't like, well, he had a way of making
things rough on them. But I always got along fine
with the old man. Never had a bit of trouble with
him. In fact, I, of course, used a little politics.
I didn't realize I was doing it at the time. When I
transferred from
animal husbandry over to the School of Veterinary
Medicine, I had some electives that I could take. I
had a year of college math, and I had a year of
agronomy, and I had some agroeconomics.
I could use as electives. There were a certain
number of elective subjects in the last two years
of veterinary medicine. And I needed those
electives. And I went down to see him one day, first
of my sophomore year. And, well, he said, Mr.
Anderson, you don't need any mathematics in
veterinary medicine. That agricultural
economics, you can just throw that out the window
and says, Lord, that agronomy. I don't see where we
can take any of that as electives. I said, well, all
right, sir. So I thought, well, if I don't get
something done, I'm going to be in this
institution an extra year. But the following
fall, my junior year, we were in clinic in that old
amphitheater down there. Marsteller walked in
that Saturday morning. He says, now, gentlemen,
we're having a football game over here today.
Baylor University is coming over here, and we're
having all of the legislatures coming over here
from Austin. They got on a special train and came
over, all the legislatures.
Well, I got to think, and it says, if you know a
representative or if you know a state senator, be
nice to him because that's where our money comes
from. Well,
I got to thinking about it. I had politicked for my
state senator. I'd stumped for him. And I wanted
him to meet Marsteller. I said, you know, I don't
know what I was thinking back then, but anyway.
Soon as that football game was over, I had Claude
Isabel spotted, and I found Marsteller, and I got
them together. I said, this is Senator Isabel. Oh,
yeah, Doctor. And Isabel was an influential man in
Austin at that time. So Marsteller put us in that
old Studebaker sedan of his, took us down to the
hospital, and opened the door, and says, show him
around, Dan. And I showed him around, you know, and
I forget now what all we went into. But anyway, then
we took the senator back and put him on the train.
The old man gave me one of those Maxauer cigars and
took me around to the dormitory. And he was just
pleased as punch, you know. And, of course, I was
happy that we got them together. But anyway... I
went on to the house, but on Monday afternoon, as
soon as I got a chance, I went down to see
Marsteller. Come in, Dan. What can I do for you?
Well, I've got some courses here I want to transfer
as electives. I've got some college math here. Oh,
yeah, everybody, that's basic. Everybody ought
to have mathematics. Everybody ought to have some
mathematics, that algebra especially. And that
agricultural economics says that that just gives
you a more well-rounded education and that
agronomy you know that's that that's the earth
that you everybody ought to have that too and i said
well now that's what what else i said that's all
that's all that's all i have yeah well couldn't we
couldn't we use that in place of something else no
sure i said that's all well that was that was 12
hours Let me see. I think Bull Tech's advanced
military science was a three-hour course. So that
was six hours in junior year and six hours in the
senior year, as well as I remember. So it was 12
hours of work, and he just flipped it over to me just
like that. Well, anyway,
Mark Steller had his faults, but again, I remember
when I had finished school, and I hadn't been out of
school very long, and... You graduated in...
1938, yes. Go ahead.
I needed a recommendation. I was going to work for
the Ralston Purina Company, and they wanted a
letter of recommendation from the school and my
credits and all that stuff. And he wrote me the
darndest recommendation ever. Well, he did that
for all of the boys. After they got out, if he could
do anything for them. Now, he was hard on Dick. He
was hard on Dick. And he was hard on several of the
older of the students above me. Dick who? Dick
Self? Oh, Dick. Dickinson. Dickinson. Ray
Dickinson. Oh, yeah. OK. All right. All right. But
I got along fine with Marsteller and Dr. Leonard.
We were fortunate back there then to have the
professors down there that we had.
I give them a lot of credit for... Up until that
time, the School of Veterinary Medicine, as far as
legislative acts for funds, it was very difficult
for the veterinary division to get very much
funding. Isn't that right? Oh, that's right. And
your class was small. Isn't that correct, too? The
class before me, I think, had eight or ten
students. But my class comes along, and we had
about 32, I think, or 35, or something like that.
But the financing was a per capita thing, based on
the number of students that you had. And that's why
after 38, or after my class graduated, we had a lot
of those boys from New York, and New Jersey, and all
over the world that came in here and they were
accepted.
But it was a necessity to keep the school going.
When you graduated, did you work for Ralston
Purina to start? Well, no. I spent my junior, the
summer of my junior year, in San Antonio with Drs.
Gleeson and Neal. And that was the best three
months of training that I had prior to graduation.
It was a mixed practice? In a mixed practice. And
after
spending one summer down there with them, I went
back to A&M, and if there was a surgery to do, I'd
grab it and do it. You know, those other boys
were... they were a little hesitant because they
hadn't had that hands-on training like i had then i
went back with them for uh two or three months after
i graduated and this opportunity with ralston
purina came up and i went with them for a couple of
years that brought you up to 1940 and the war was
beginning uh well i i moved back to uh back to taro
texas which is only about 15 miles from my old home
and uh went into practice there i was there for uh
well i was with uh i was with Purina only a year i
guess and then i came back there and i was in
practice two years until august of 1941 and i was
called into active beauty old General McCallum,
it was Colonel McCallum then, was service command
veterinarian, 8th service command
veterinarian. And he was stationed in San
Antonio. I reported into Fort Sam Houston August
the 13th, 1941.
And I had been there about two
weeks. And they had the maneuvers going on in
Louisiana. 25,000 men down in Louisiana, the
biggest maneuver they'd had since World War I. And
they needed a little help up here on meat
procurement in Fort Worth. So McCallum told me, he
said, uh, We are going to send you to Fort Worth for
about 30 days, and then I'll bring you back here,
and I'll send you to Chicago to the meat school.
Then I'll give you an airfield out here somewhere
to handle. I said, that's all right. That's fine.
Well, I'd been up here about 30 days, and I was with
Colonel Ludwigs. Colonel Ludwigs called me in one
day and says, how would you like to stay here? Well,
I said, Colonel, that'd make me so darn mad I
wouldn't know what to do. He said, well, we're
going to keep you. So I
fought the war right here in Dallas and Fort Worth.
I was head of procurement in Dallas for a year or
two. But
our group weren't moved because
At the outbreak of war, we were shown, our 201 files
showed that we were at the San Antonio QM Depot.
Then in a year or two, when the Fort Worth
Quartermaster Depot was formed, we showed to have
transferred from San Antonio to Fort Worth. Well,
during the war, you know, they tried to transfer
you around. If you'd been to a place so long, you
know, they'd transfer you to some other place. And
because we, our 201 file showed that we had had a
transfer, we just fought the war right here in Fort
Worth. However, there was quite a bit to be done.
The Fort Worth stockyards were in their heyday in
those days. And there was a lot of procurement
going on, and the Veterinary Corps at that time
really got a pretty good name for itself in the
inspection and procurement situation. Isn't
that correct? Really and truly, the Veterinary
Corps did a tremendous job. Tell us about your
operation here in Fort Worth with the
Quartermaster. We had,
I guess, eight or 10 veterinary officers
permanently assigned here. And then on into the
war, we had a
schooling.
What did they call it? Well, anyway, we brought
young veterinary officers in that And they were
assigned to us on temporary duty until they either
went to Chicago or were transferred out somewhere
else. And we were charged with the responsibility
of
seeing that these contracts were filled with the
product as designated in the contract. that the
product met those specifications. And we pretty
well, as far as the
sanitation and all, we had the help of the USDA
people. But there were times when we had to blow the
whistle because of sanitary reasons, not
Necessarily at the packing house, but at some
other places that we had around here that were
producing food products. But anyway, we had Armor
and Swift, and we had procurement from the Fort
Worth Poultry and Egg Company and one or two other
poultry places. And then we had dairy products. We
even bought fish. Fish. And it got to the point
there at one time where we bought carp from
McQuillan's Fish Market, I think it was. But I
even did inspection. They sent me to Dallas.
I hadn't been in service too long to inspect a
canning plant. They were producing army field
ration at the old thrift packing company over
there. And we produced millions and millions of
cans of that field ration. And I didn't know
anything about pulling the vacuum or... any of the
process of canning, but I learned it. You know, you
had to learn it. And it was interesting, and then we
pulled out a certain number of cans out of each
batch and put it over there in an incubator with the
temperature way up, you know, and let it incubate
for so many days to make sure that the product was
properly processed. And then it was shipped out to
go all over the world. It was really a big operation
as far as the number of tons of supplies that went
out. Right, right. Before we get back to your
veterinary practice and so forth, I'd like to have
you comment just a little bit on the demise of the
Fort Worth Stockyards. That was something that
had to come, isn't that correct, because of the The
fact that it shipped the animals in when it was
easier to put the packing house out near the
animals, isn't that more or less the basis of the
situation? That's true of the packing plants.
Now, Armour and Swift were big operations here at
that time, as we saw it. Each plant had about 3,000
to 4,000 people working in it. There were 3,000 to
4,000 people in each plant. And
it had got to the point, though, where a lot of their
equipment was obsolete. And these more modern
plants could do the job quicker and more
efficiently. But Armour and Swift or someone
could have come in here and taken over and put in one
of those streamlined plants. But the
distribution of cattle chains, we saw so many of
these auction markets spring up, and cattle were
marketed through the auction markets, and then
they'd be sent to packers. They didn't have to come
through Fort Worth. They'd be sent to packers all
over the country and even out of state. on the fat
cattle. And of course, the stocker and feeder
cattle went out to the feedlots and back to the
country. And that cut down tremendously on the
heads of cattle going through the Fort Worth
stockyards. That's what really hurt the
stockyards more than anything else, or your
auction markets springing up. And it was
justified. You know, if
you take your cattle to an auction, you can sit
there and watch them, and if you don't like the
price, you can peel them. But so many times you've
shipped cattle into Fort Worth, and you've spent a
lot of money getting them in here, and you'll take a
bigger loss and just let them go than you would if
you were closer to home with them. And the
so-called commission people got their
commission no matter what. They did, and some of
them in an unscrupulous manner, unfortunately.
That didn't help the stockyards either. You know,
there was wire working in that commission
business. We had honest commission people, but we
had a lot of the kind that we don't want to do
business with. I want to get off into practice now,
but I think I want to. Okay, tell us about the
beginning of practice. I know it wasn't quite the
same getting out of school and so forth as if you
hadn't had the three months down there in San
Antonio, but when you got out on your own there in
East Texas, how did you feel? What did you do? After
I talked with you this morning, I
hadn't. really surveyed that thing so much uh in
the past i just think about the changes that have
been made but as i think back of the things that i
didn't have the tools that i didn't have to
practice with then that we have today it scares me i
don't know why anybody would go into practice uh
what we didn't know any better you know back there
in those days uh i made a A few little notations
here.
You were more or less more out in the boonies than
you were in Houghton City. Tell us about practice
out there. You're a little closer to the soil out
there than you are here. Well, practice was rough
back in those days.
you might go out and treat a milk fever for four or
five dollars and pull a calf for six or eight and
castrate a colt for two dollars because that was
the going price in that area for the we had a lot of uh
of non-graduates you know a lot of quacks in the
area in fact i remember about 1940
when uh The investigator for the state
association,
no, let me see. Yeah, he was with the state
association. It wasn't the board that he was with.
He was with the state association. And we had an old
quack down there. Did you remember the name of this
investigator or not? No, I don't remember his
name. Okay, all right. We had an old gentleman down
there that was a non-graduate. uh and didn't even
have a non-graduate license he was just right
quack and he had raised a family there in carroll
and he knew the justice of the peace and he was he was
a good citizen and he was uh everybody knew him you
know and this investigator came in and he said well
we've got all the facts on this fella and uh we've
got information that with the old practice act we
had then, we can get an injunction against him
doing any more work. What do you want to do? And I
thought about it a few minutes, and I said, I don't
want to do it. I said, if he can out-quack me, he can
have it. Well, he went back and told the old justice
of the peace what remarks I'd made, Well, that old
man was immediately my friend, and the word spread
all over the country that that doctor didn't want
to do anything to that old man. The word got around.
But anyway... Didn't you feel that you actually
did better with his goodwill and the difficult
work he would just refer to you more or less? Isn't
that the way it worked out? The way it worked out, I
had the goodwill of everybody, see? And he had a lot
of friends. He'd been down there 50 years, and he
had a lot, you know, friends. You meet a lot of
people, but old friends, that's different. And
had I had him stop, it wouldn't have helped me a bit.
Sure wouldn't. Well, actually, they weren't
around too much longer. In my case, we had one the
same way in the town, and when he Now his
granddaughters are some of my excellent clients.
Yeah, right, right, right. He borrowed a bottle of
rabies vaccine from me and never paid me back. How
did you find practice? You were talking about, I
know you're getting your notes out about what you
did. The first farm calls that you made with the
drugs and the equipment that you had, how did you
just get the job done? What kind of a card did you
have to go out with and so forth? Well, I had a...
I had a Ford Coupe, we called it back there then, a
business cube. And, uh... You have a bag and... Oh,
yes. And a box, too? Yes, I still have the old bag
that my sister and brother-in-law gave me when I
started in practice. Didn't you get it, uh,
bronze? No, I... All right, all right, but she
still got it. But anyway, we had calcium
gluconate, uh... You already had calcium
gluconate by that time. Yes. Things have come a
long ways. Just within the past few years, they had
found out the use, the value of calcium gluconate
in milk pavers.
We still had a full of aricoline for...
orichalene and atropine uh or colics you know uh
we used we had we had uh nux vomica strychnine those
the same thing which we used quite a lot in bovine
practice and we had some of those old barium
chloride tablets uh I believe it was barium
chloride. We called them rumen stimulants that
we'd give those old cows. As
I look at what we have today that we didn't have
then, I don't know how we got along, really. Of
course, your advice on husbandry and care and your
knowledge of parasitism and so forth was such that
you gave a lot of advice on how to get along without a
lot of medications. Well, that's very true.
That's very true. We gave a lot of thought even back
there then to animal health and preventative
medicine. But
when I started into practice, all of the vitamins,
they weren't standardized.
When I was a student, when I was a student in A&M, I
worked in the animal science department with
graduate students studying deficiencies of
vitamins. We'd produce vitamin A deficiency in
chickens, and we'd bear a bear in pigeons, I guess.
All of these deficiencies we could exhibit, we
could show, and then put them on cod liver oil
supplements or the vitamin C. Well, the vitamin C
would use orange juice back then, see? And nurse
these animals back. And it was very interesting,
just as a student, to see how those animals would
recover if we hadn't let them go too far with
deficiency. And we'd get a vitamin E deficiency in
rats by feeding polished rice, I think. I don't
know. But anyway, we didn't have any units. No
standardization in our vitamins. But it was good.
to know that
we needed all of those necessary things. But
anyway, I think even back there then that our basic
knowledge in pathology and physiology and all, we
were able to... could help a lot of people with
animal health problems or by disease prevention.
Very good. At that time, there
was so much demand for veterinary medicine that
there really wasn't a whole lot of crowding and so
forth, was there?
No, there wasn't, but The economy of the times
forced us to work pretty hard for a little money,
see? The fees
weren't anything like what they are today. We were
just coming out of the Depression, or we were still
in a depressed state, and uh... we had to work uh...
our services uh... well they weren't worth a whole
lot based on the economics of the animal you know
right about your time was when we started the birth
of what you might call aseptic veterinary
medicine people like bill armistead he was in your
class was he not there were several famous people
in your class besides bill dan roberts and Cocky
Hander,
and Darrell Sprott, who was killed in an
automobile accident several years ago, who did
some good work in the Philippines during the war.
He was, Sprott was very active in the quarter horse
business, owned a famous quarter horse from the
King Ranch, and had he lived, I'm sure that he would
have been very active in the quarter horse
business today.
Well, let's see. And George Thomas from over
there. A couple of boys from Mississippi,
brothers. One of them was a state veterinarian
down there
for a while. Yeah, we had some. Oh,
my. I can't think of those boys' names. We had some
fine people in that class.
Back in those days, we just started out on aseptic
veterinary medicine. When you first started to
practice, aseptic techniques weren't really so
popular then as they were a couple years later.
Isn't that right? I think... I think that
they began stressing aseptic techniques more
after my graduation, yes. Let me put it another
way. They began to really realize the importance
of it. When I graduated from school a few years
later, they wouldn't have thought of going into
the abdomen of a horse. And if they did, they gave a
very unfavorable prognosis. But now they do it
with impunity. You don't need to worry about it.
This is an interesting point. And that came up in
our lifetime, isn't that correct? That came up in
our lifetime. We were taught that if you invaded
the abdominal cavity of the horse, peritonitis
was inevitable. Do you know what? After the war, in
the... I guess about 1947, I did the first
successful cesarean on a mare. Recorded success,
recorded. And it wasn't anything, I wasn't, it
wasn't because of me, it was, I just happened to be
at the right place at the right time. I had a
thoroughbred mare brought in to me that was bred to
a famous imported horse, Knight's Caprice. He was
supposed to be an outstanding horse. He never did.
But anyway, this old boy said, I want to save that
colt,
even if we have to sacrifice the mother. Well, that
old mare went into labor on a Sunday afternoon, and
that colt was all turned around. I says, I don't
think I'll ever deliver that colt alive. I hit her
with mag chloral and knocked her down,
sliced her flank open, removed, took out that live
coat, and I said, I can't let this mare die. But then
we had some sulfur drugs, and we had a few things,
and I sewed her back up, and she lived. Without
shaving and all that sort of thing? Oh, I shaved.
I'm sure. I don't remember the details, but yeah,
yeah. But you did a reasonably septic job, right?
Yes, yes, yes. But the thing of it is, that
stimulated other people. They said, well, look
there, if that old country boy saved this mayor,
well, necessarily, and that means that we can do
more research in that area. And this was recorded
in the old Gen Sal Journal. And I used to have one,
but I've lost it somewhere in the long run. But I
gave all of the procedures. John Wilkins, do you
remember John Wilkins? Well, no. Go ahead. John
was with Gensow, and he said, Dan, we ought to write
that up. I said, yeah, all right. So I sat down and
scribbled a few notes, and he put it together, and
it And it was published in the Gen Sal Journal in
about 1947, I guess. And let me see.
Yeah, it was 46 or 47. And
as I say, it wasn't because I was an outstanding
individual in any way. It just happened that way,
see. That's wonderful. That was a wonderful
beginning, and things went on from there. Same way
with when you moved here to Haltom City, you didn't
practice too long out in East Texas, did you? No.
You stayed in Fort Worth after you left the
service. Well, when I, let me see, in 45, when we saw
the war was going to be over, Eddie Grist was state
veterinarian and his office was over here in the
W.T. Wagner building in Fort Worth. Eddie was
hired by A&M